# How to Write a Shell Script?
- date: 2019-07-01 18:11
- tags: shell
- category: guides
-------

Finnally, I've done it! Wow, it took me 3 hours to explore the ability of bash scripts.

I was trying to write a shell script to help me create this blog article, in an interactive way. 

The blog articles are organized in a directory structure: `_content/{year}/{article-name-slug.md}`,  and it also has a template to write the meta info for this article, which is like:

```

# How to Write a Shell Script?
- date: 2019-07-01 18:11
- tags: shell
- category: guides
-------


```

So the basic idea is like this:

 * I want to create the page where I could simply input the title, tags, and category
 * the date time is generated by the script
 * the file path is determined by the information I input and the date
 * the file name is slugified
 * all the information is filled in the template
 * use vim to open the file and filled the initial content with the template

All the functions I needed and searched are listed below:

 * prompt info and read values from user input. using `echo` and `read` command
 * list the tags and categories. using `ls -p`, `tr`, `sort`, and `column`
 * making the steps as functions
 * fill template file with environmental variables. using `cat`, `echo` and `eval`
 * creatign temporary file to hold the generated content from the template. using `$RANDOM` env variable for a random number.
 * fill the vi editing content after entering the editor. using `vi <filename> -c "read <tmpfile>"`

So the final example of the shell script can be found [here](https://github.com/terryoy/terryoy.github.io/blob/master/_newpage.sh)
